Continued Demand for Sustainability | Blackcoffer Insights, The business of business is no longer to do just business
or increase the bottom line to maximize shareholder value. Rather, the concept
of business is moving towards a new dimension of sustainable business, the
triple bottom line. People, planet, and profits are the core
ideologies that are rooted in sustainable business. Sustainability is taken
into account when companies want to create long-term value creation along with
strategies that promote the longevity of the company. As corporate
accountability rises, expectations and need for transparency among stakeholders
increases therefore companies have started to recognize the need to be
sustainable to stay alert and alive.  Business
globalization that has happened over the previous few decades has made some
companies more powerful than some national governments, making it easy for them
to exploit inexpensive labor, plunder natural resources, causing severe impacts
through pollution on the natural environment, human health, and biodiversity.
Unfortunately for them, their horrible past has been catching up with them like
in the case of child labor issues of IKEA & Nike, Rana Plaza accident in
Bangladesh affecting Zara, H&M and other clothing brands, environment
pollution by BP, Shell, Exxon Mobil etc. With the emergence of internet and
social media these practices can no longer be covered up and silenced, the
world has become more educated and less tolerant and therefore with every
misdemeanor that is committed brand equity takes a hit. The media is fast
picking up on cover-ups, half-truths, and bad corporate behavior and demanding
accountability and transparency from corporates. Therefore to survive, companies
are compelled to adopt sustainability and bring forth the rules for their
suppliers as well.  Many
of the irresponsible company practices and disasters that are witnessed in that
last couple of decades were motivated solely by short-termism- the desire
for instant gratification- and the appeal of short-term performance
incentives. For instance, deferred maintenance and slack leadership were to
blame for the 1984 leaks from the pesticide plant Union Carbide India Ltd in
Bhopal. Estimates placed more than half a million casualties from the gas
discharge of the plant. Finally, Union Carbide Corporation’s 1989 litigation
payout came out to today’s equivalent of nearly one billion US dollars. Another
example where the company was forced to shut down operations was Coca Cola at
its Plachimada plant in Kerala. The local communities faced acute water
shortage after the commissioning of the plant and the company authorities
blatantly ignored the community woes. These businesses stated above didn’t
respect stakeholder engagement which ultimately lead to their untimely demise. Today’s
issues cannot be solved without participation from all stakeholders, and
companies with influence should be the torchbearers of change. They need to
engage with regulators, communities, societies, suppliers, and NGOs for
effective and desired outcomes. Issues where engagement are required include
population growth; global middle-class growth; decline in ecosystems; water
scarcity; food safety; material resource security; higher global energy demand;
changes in geographic patterns of energy consumption; and increasing climate
change regulatory interventions. By actively pursuing the triple
bottom line, the essential possibilities available are: In order for companies to commit
to sustainability they should have the below objectives in place: Sustainability -triple bottom line- can drive a company’s achievement beyond shareholder value creation by building corporate shared value at its core and help in addressing social &environmental problems. Several investors today use ESG metrics to evaluate the ethical effect and sustainability practices of an organization. Investors are looking at variables like the carbon footprint of a company, water use, community development efforts, and diversity board before investing. Companies have started responding to investors by publishing their annual sustainability reports. Research indicates that businesses with elevated ESG scores have reduced debt and equity costs and that sustainability projects can contribute to improving economic efficiency while encouraging government assistance. It’s only a matter of time, the flow of sustainability nourishes businesses in achieving holistic development for the environment, people and its profits. Blackcoffer Insights 12 | Sanjana Jose Varghese | IIM Lucknow  